Title: From Forensics to Ecosystems: Rethinking Watermarks for Generative AI Oversight

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07337v1

Published Time: Mon, 10 Aug 2026 01:03:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# From Forensics to Ecosystems: Rethinking Watermarks for Generative AI Oversight 

# Daniel Susser 1* , John Thickstun 2, Gili Vidan 1

> 1

Dept. of Information Science, Cornell University 

> 2

Dept. of Computer Science, Cornell University 

{susser, jthickstun, gvidan }@cornell.edu 

Abstract 

The arrival of generative AI as a cheap, widely accessible commercial service, and the tidal wave of AI-generated syn-thetic content it has unleashed, have provoked deep epistemic and social anxieties and raised difficult governance questions that policymakers are struggling to address. One approach that has attracted both enthusiasm from regulators and skep-ticism from researchers is digital watermarking. Signals em-bedded in a synthetically-generated piece of content indicat-ing that it was AI-generated—possibly even identifying the specific systems that generated it—appear to offer a path to-ward mitigating risks of genAI that avoids the downsides of more interventionist strategies. But critics warn that water-marks may prove technically brittle, epistemically ambigu-ous, and politically ineffectual tools. In this paper, we explore the challenges and opportunities of using digital watermark-ing for AI governance, paying special attention to the specific problem of watermarking AI-generated text. We argue that such critiques often treat the problem of identifying synthetic content as an isolated forensic question. Instead, we propose reconceptualizing digital watermarks as tools for understand-ing the impacts of synthetic content on media ecosystems, rather than reliably identifying individual pieces of synthetic content. Such an “ecosystems approach” more effectively uti-lizes the features of watermarks. And while this approach raises its own governance challenges, we argue that they are more tractable than the challenges of using watermarks for digital forensics. 

# Introduction 

In 2018, tech journalist Max Read asked, “how much of the internet is fake?” His short piece on the eerie sense that a lot of online content is not only being generated by non-humans, but is also intended for consumption by non-humans, answered pithily, “turns out, a lot of it, actually.” Read described a hypothetical inflection point called “the in-version” at which the non-human traffic and content would become so pervasive, detection tools would start treating it as the authentic metric against which human action would be measured (and censored) (Read 2018). In the years since, the rise of commercially available generative AI (genAI) made 

> *

Authors listed alphabetically. All contributed equally. The au-thors thank Calvin Qiu for invaluable research assistance. Copyright © 2026, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

the hypothetical seem imminent, shaping much of the pop-ular media discussion around AI-generated or “synthetic” 1

content, described by philosopher Joshua Habgood-Coote as the “epistemic apocalypse narrative” (Habgood-Coote 2023). The detection conversation also shifted, from mon-itoring online traffic patterns, to examining the mechanism for content production itself. If only we could confidently know which pieces of media were produced by AI, perhaps we could also confidently know what to do about them. Focusing on the means of content production sidesteps a variety of thorny, value-laden questions of content moder-ation, institutional trust, and governance structures in favor of what at first appears as a narrower, technical, and hope-fully solvable question—was this content generated using AI tools? 2 But, as we discuss below, even this framing of the question around the production of media still raises deep epistemic and normative questions around governance and is anything but technically straightforward. One of the most popular proposals for such a technical solution is the use of digital watermarking to tag and therefore allow for detec-tion and disclosure of synthetic content. A digital watermark is a way to embed additional information in digital media (from videos to text) to indicate its provenance. On a techni-cal level, audio, video, and image watermarks function dif-ferently from watermarks embedded in textual output, as we elaborate below, but we discuss the possibility of watermark-ing as an umbrella term across these cases in order to surface common uses and limitations. 

> 1

In both scholarly and popular news accounts, there is often slippage and contested use of various terms for content generated by AI tools, from “deepfakes” to “generative AI content” (and indeed many forms of digitally editing and manipulating media or text that predate the current focus on large language models). Throughout the paper, we choose to use “synthetic content” as an intentionally loose term, described by the US National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) as information “significantly al-tered or generated by algorithms, including AI.” (National Institute of Standards and Technology 2024) 

> 2

Critiques of the “epistemic apocalypse narrative” have pointed out that a focus on which media was produced by AI (and therefore is often categorized as “fake”) eschews questions about which uses of genAI or more broadly fakery are legitimate, desirable, or harm-ful, ignores the long history of media manipulation, and presup-poses the utility of the label. See, for example, Immerwahr (2023) in his review of Scheirer (2024). arXiv:2608.07337v1 [cs.CY] 7 Aug 2026 While representing only one approach to “digital content transparency,” digital watermarking has been proposed by both policymakers and by commercial AI model develop-ers and providers. 3 For example, Google launched SynthID, a watermark embedded across its commercial AI products (DeepMind 2025). The European Union’s AI Act’s Arti-cle 50, which goes into effect in August 2026, sets certain “transparency obligations” for both AI providers and de-ployers to provide infrastructure for labeling synthetic con-tent that has not undergone human review. The exact techni-cal form of this requirement has not yet been specified, but the Act states that providers must “ensure that the output of the AI system are marked in a machine-readable format and detected as artificially generated or manipulated.” (European Union 2026) Though the Act leaves several broad excep-tions to the labeling requirement (for example, in the case of human review of the synthetic content), model providers will likely need to offer technical means for labeling out-puts in the form of watermarks or other disclosure mecha-nisms. This large-scale regulatory push to develop and de-ploy machine-readable marks makes it all the more press-ing to address the kinds of issues, which this paper raises, around the use of digital watermarks for AI governance. In the US, the 2023 Biden Administration Executive Or-der on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of AI specifically instructed government agencies to develop standards for labeling synthetic content by means of water-marking (Executive Office of the President 2023). The order has since been revoked by the Trump Administration, which reversed course on the urgency of labeling (Executive Office of the President 2025), but some state-level initiatives con-tinued to build on the previous administration’s efforts (Cal-ifornia Legislature 2024; Massachusetts Legislature 2025). These shifting regulatory trends suggest that rather than a broad solution for identifying and labeling synthetic content, we are likely to see the continued emergence of a patchwork of public and private orderings. But even in such a heteroge-neous environment, watermarks are still often leaned on as silver-bullet solutions to the challenges of synthetic content. Traditional watermarks are used to determine the au-thenticity of content, linking its provenance to its authority (Cox and Miller 2002). But a watermark on synthetic con-tent is used to determine in authenticity. Operationally, this places slightly different requirements on an AI watermark-ing method: a traditional watermark should be difficult to forge, whereas an AI watermark should be difficult to re-move. In this sense, AI watermarks are functionally oppo-site to digital signatures: a digital signature should break if a signed document is altered, whereas an AI watermark should be detectable even after some significant alterations. 4

> 3It is worth distinguishing between model developers and model providers, which may not always be the same entity. For example, OpenAI is both a model developer and model provider, but Microsoft, which uses OpenAI-developed models in its prod-ucts, is a provider. As we discuss below, current AI watermarking techniques require the cooperation of model providers.
> 4Other disclosure methods that rely on digital signatures of provenance statements are therefore distinct from digital water-marking. Though even the legal and epistemic status of cryp-

Much of the critique of AI watermarking has focused on this inversion of the original use of watermarks as signs of authenticity. The digital media environment makes syn-thetic content malleable in the hands of the user, raising questions over their brittleness (Zhang et al. 2024). Addi-tionally, if only some AI model providers adopt watermark-ing schemes, what about media produced using self-hosted models or providers who opt out of a watermarking scheme? And even if a piece of media does bear an AI watermark, what sense should users and platforms make of the trust-worthiness of this object (Leibowicz 2023)? In short, crit-ics argue that watermarks are technically brittle, epistem-ically ambiguous, and politically ineffective in addressing the challenge of trust in an information environment satu-rated with synthetic content. These critiques, we argue, adopt a forensic perspective on the challenges of synthetic content. They primarily point to the shortcomings of watermarks as a means to authenti-cate the status of a given individual piece of media. Com-puter forensics (and the subfield of digital media foren-sics) belong to what literary and media scholar Matthew Kirschenbaum described as the “forensic imagination” of modernity—the desire to uncover meaning, identity and in-tentionality in the smallest traces, fragments, and overlooked details (Kirschenbaum 2008). The technical and epistemic challenges of enacting the forensic imagination, however, predate the rapid spread of synthetic content and pertain to a long history of digitally or otherwise manipulated media (Chesney and Citron 2019; Habgood-Coote 2023; Scheirer 2024). The use of watermarks as a forensic tool is indeed limited. But a particular challenge raised by the widespread availability of commercial AI tools is one of scale. “The in-version” as a tipping point for trust in digital media as a whole turns a question of assuring authenticity of a given media object into a question of measuring and contending with saturation. Rather than the forensic hope to accurately and compre-hensively signal the presence of individual pieces of syn-thetic content, we argue that digital watermarking is better suited to an ecosystems approach: their primary utility is in measuring system-level impacts of synthetic content as a whole on media environments. Much like epidemiologists use wastewater testing to track the spread of disease in par-ticular geographic communities—instead of, or as a comple-ment to, testing individuals—digital watermarking can pro-vide a high-level view of synthetic content’s incursion into our media ecosystems. Shifting to the ecosystems approach still raises challeng-ing, but somewhat different, questions surrounding the de-ployment of watermarks and their uses in AI governance. We first provide a technical overview of audio, visual, im-age, and text-based watermarks. We then discuss five high-level governance questions that need to be addressed by pol-icymakers, model developers, platform operators, and users 

> tographically signed digital signatures was not always taken for granted as trustworthy. For more on the history of digital signa-tures in French and US courts, see Blanchette (2012). We discuss the distinction between watermarking and cryptographic signature-based provenance tools in greater detail below.

if the ecosystem approach is to be used instead of, or as a complement to, the forensic approach. We argue that the ecosystem model offers more workable paths to resolving these governance questions than the forensic mode. Lastly, we ground the payoff of reconceptualizing AI watermarks as ecosystem indicators by examining two scenarios for their use in two types of media platforms—a music streaming ser-vice concerned with audio and a scientific publishing plat-form concerned with text-based generation of preprint pub-lications. 

# Technical Background 

Identifying synthetic content is challenging because genAI systems are engineered to mimic human content. AI systems ingest text, images, videos, and other media created by hu-man authors—“training data”—and developers train the sys-tems to generate content that is statistically indistinguishable from the training data. Popular AI detection methods attempt to identify synthetic content by noticing imperfections in the process used to train the AI (Tian and Cui 2025; Mitchell et al. 2023; Hans et al. 2024). These methods place AI de-tectors in an adversarial relationship with AI providers. Wa-termarking, by contrast, is not inherently adversarial. AI sys-tems are not deliberately designed to deceive, but rather to generate high-quality content that is, by definition, difficult to distinguish from human content. AI watermarking meth-ods formalize a collaborative relationship between providers and detectors: providers inject a subtle signal into synthetic content, the watermark, that detectors can use to confidently identify the synthetic content. An AI watermark has three primary desiderata (Kudi-tipudi et al. 2024). First, the watermark should make syn-thetic content easily detectable. Ideally, watermarking meth-ods aim for strong statistical guarantees on the rate of false positives of AI detection—while it is difficult to provide guarantees for adversarial detectors, such guarantees are of-ten possible for watermark detectors because the detector re-lies on statistical patterns intentionally embedded into syn-thetic content during generation, rather than heuristic mark-ers of synthetic content that could coincidentally appear in human content. Second, the watermark should not degrade the quality of synthetic content. Neither the model provider nor the users of genAI will tolerate a protocol that materially diminishes the AI product (i.e., its ability to produce high-quality content). Third, there should be some amount of fric-tion to remove a watermark from synthetic content. This fi-nal property (known as “robustness”) allows for an adver-sarial relationship between the AI provider and AI users or distributors: while a responsible AI provider may implement a watermark to clearly identify synthetic content originating from their system, users of this system and content distrib-utors may try to remove evidence of the content’s synthetic origin. Robustness precludes the use of metadata for track-ing content provenance and entails that the watermark must be embedded directly into the content itself, as metadata can be easily altered, or separated from content entirely. 5

> 5For a survey of techniques for visual watermarking see Begum and Uddin (2020) and for work on watermarking language models

These three desiderata are technically achievable because AI watermarks are inserted into synthetic content at its mo-ment of inception, unlike traditional watermarking methods, which add watermarks to pre-existing content post hoc. By weaving the watermark into synthetic content as it is gener-ated, it is possible to embed a strong statistical signal while guaranteeing the quality of generated content. Traditional post hoc methods seek to hide a watermark in impercepti-ble bits of the content, but these steganographic techniques are difficult to apply to media like text, where every bit is perceptible. Post hoc watermarks that rely on, for example, synonym substitutions make subtle alterations to the mean-ing of text, potentially degrading its quality. 6 In contrast, re-cent work on genAI watermarks for text guarantees that text generated with a watermark has comparable quality to text generated without the watermark. In this setting, it is possi-ble to make strong guarantees on quality—meaning text gen-erated with a watermark is provably indistinguishable from text generated without a watermark, unless you have knowl-edge of the watermark and know exactly what to look for. (Christ, Gunn, and Zamir 2024; Kuditipudi et al. 2024) Crucially, detection of an AI watermark is a statistical en-deavor: watermark detectors scan content for evidence of the watermark and return an assessment in the form of p-values that measure the probability of observing the con-tent under the null hypothesis that the content was generated without a watermark. 7 The smaller the p-value, the stronger the evidence of a watermark. The strength of an AI water-mark is constrained by the entropy of the AI generator— high-entropy content like audio, images, and video is rela-tively easy to watermark compared to low-entropy content like text. This principle extends to more narrowly defined generation tasks. For example, while both computer code and creative writing can be produced by the same text gener-ation system, computer code is typically lower-entropy than stories. Therefore, applying an AI watermark to a text gen-eration system will typically impart weaker watermarks on generated code than it does on generated stories. Designing for weak signals affords some flexibility. For one, a stronger watermark may require adding so much information to the synthetic output (especially in the context of text generation) that outputs would be significantly distorted by the water-mark. Trading off the strength of the watermark can min-imize the watermark’s impact on the quality of generated content. As a statistical measure, watermarks are distinct from other provenance tools that rely on a cryptographic signa-ture appended to the piece of media’s metadata. One promi-nent initiative to create infrastructure for digital provenance is the Coalition for Content Provenance and Authentication 

> see Kirchenbauer et al. (2023).
> 6For a review of post-hoc watermarks for text, see Kamaruddin et al. (2018).
> 7In contrast to wastewater measurements, which must be cali-brated against an independent source of truth, watermarking proto-cols control both insertion and detection of the watermark, meaning that detection is largely calibrated by construction. For empirical analysis of watermark calibration and robustness in-the-wild, see Sander et al. (2026).

(C2PA) standard for “Content Credentials.” Backed by a coalition of news and media organizations, genAI tools de-velopers, social media platforms, and academic publishers, 8

the C2PA Content Credentials standard offers a method of binding contextual information about the methods of pro-duction of a piece of media to its metadata. The crypto-graphic authentication the standard provides is not statisti-cal but rather able to provide assurance that the information contained in the signed metadata is accurate. It is often pre-sented as a complementary means of authenticating and pro-viding information about the provenance of a piece of media to tools like watermarking (though some have argued the use of both tools may result in contradictions (Nemecek et al. 2026). A fundamental issue with the C2PA approach is that the metadata itself, though cryptographically signed, can be easily removed by a user before posting a piece of media to a platform checking for signed metadata that would label it as synthetic content. To effectively deter such acts of re-moval, an authenticator would need to treat the absence of such metadata as itself a reason to suspect content, meaning that provenance tools need to be applied to any piece of con-tent, whether synthetic or not. This assumes a fairly stable and centralized content environment where parties are not adversarial and where the infrastructure for preserving and interpreting the metadata is widely available across a vari-ety of content hosts. For these reasons, rather than focus on how cryptographic signatures may provide greater degrees of forensic certainty, we focus on the ways watermarks may be more effective measures of ecosystem-level questions. 

# Reconceptualizing Digital Watermarks 

As synthetic content flows into different media environments—social media, news, streaming music, film, academic scholarship—it is creating different prob-lems for different participants in each space. On social media, for example, users and content moderators have to judge the authenticity and veracity of each text, image, and video they encounter, while the platforms organizing and distributing that content have to judge whether it violates their terms of service or community guidelines, and identify bots and “coordinated inauthentic behavior” by malign actors. On music streaming platforms, synthetic content—AI-generated music—threatens to capture a share of listeners’ attention, hurting artists’ ability to reach and profit from new audiences. And if the AI-generated music is bad, it threatens to turn users off of platforms, or to reduce the amount of time they spend on them. In the film industry, writers, actors, musicians, and artists are contending with synthetic content that appropriates their image, voice, style, ideas, and other creative contributions. In academia, peer reviewers and publishers struggle to enforce norms of academic integrity as synthetic content is incorporated into the research process. Given the myriad ways synthetic content can impact in-dividual and collective rights and interests, it’s unlikely that any single, comprehensive approach to governing such con-tent will emerge. Rather, in the coming years, we can expect 

> 8https://c2pa.org/membership/

to see a heterogeneous mix of public policy and private or-dering develop in piecemeal fashion to resolve specific kinds of conflicts between specific kinds of actors. Policymakers will deploy what legal tools they can in response to pres-sure from constituents and industry groups, while courts de-cide how existing laws—in areas such as intellectual prop-erty and product liability—apply to AI-related cases. Com-panies will develop technological solutions, devise new li-censing and contractual arrangements, and invest in brand management to avoid alienating users. Unions and civil so-ciety groups will organize, protest, audit, litigate, educate the public, and engage in other forms of collective action, while individuals test whatever self-help strategies they can muster. The question for proponents of digital watermarks is where they fit—what role, if any, they can play—in this rapidly changing, unchoreographed ensemble. Watermark enthusiasts have traditionally answered that they are forensic tools for reliably identifying individual pieces of synthetic content. We argue that critics of digital watermarking are right to view this standard answer with skepticism. But that does not mean digital watermarking has no role to play. In-stead of a forensic conceptualization of AI watermarks, we argue for an ecosystems perspective —an approach that uses the centralized nature of AI model providers and the statis-tical nature of digital watermarking as indicators of overall synthetic content saturation in a given information ecosys-tem. A watermark applied en masse to synthetic content can be used to assess the population-level impacts of content originating from an AI provider on that ecosystem, even if it is only weakly detectable. Recognizing the usefulness of a brittle watermark is especially significant for considering the usefulness of watermarks for textual synthetic content, where weaker signals are expected. Rather than asking wa-termarks to answer the forensic question, “is this AI?,” we propose to use them as indicators of how much AI is all around us. In what follows, we show why researchers, advocates, and policymakers should reconceptualize digital watermarks as tools for understanding media ecosystems rather than foren-sically identifying specific pieces of synthetic content. And we explore how the challenges associated with using wa-termarks to govern AI are transformed—and made more tractable—when the utility of watermarks is reconceptual-ized in this way. 

## Watermarks as Evidence 

Watermarks are signals—evidence—about the provenance of the media they’re attached to, which have to be inter-preted and acted on by some audience. To use watermarks effectively as a tool for AI governance, the first questions to ask are what kind of evidence they provide and to whom they provide it. As we discussed above, the evidence digital watermarks generate is statistical—it indicates the probability that con-tent is synthetic 9—and intrinsic to statistical evidence is the 

> 9More specifically, as we discuss above, they indicate the like-lihood, expressed as a p-value, of detecting a watermark signal as

possibility of error. Operating in the forensic mode, some-one using digital watermarks to discern if a particular piece of content was AI-generated must therefore contend with the possibility of false positives (wrongly concluding that real content is synthetic) and false negatives (wrongly conclud-ing that synthetic content is real). For trained statisticians this is not a problem, as there are methods by which to sys-tematically account for statistical errors. But for the lay in-terpreter of digital watermarks there is significant room for misunderstanding. The average person is notoriously bad at reasoning about probabilities. If a college professor is told, for example, that there is a 68% likelihood a student’s essay contains synthetic content, there is a serious chance the pro-fessor will over-interpret the signal and conclude with too much confidence that the student cheated (potentially a false positive). Similarly, if the statistical threshold for flagging posts on social media as “possibly AI-generated” is set too high, casual readers might assume that un-flagged content is necessarily real (potential false negatives). For digital watermarks to be used responsibly in a foren-sic mode—i.e., to identify individual pieces of synthetic content—care must be taken to ensure that they are contex-tualized appropriately and interpreted correctly. For exam-ple, courts routinely consider statistical evidence and there are long-standing debates among law scholars about how to properly incorporate such evidence into legal proceed-ings. One can imagine effectively introducing forensic digi-tal watermarks as evidence at trial (to support claims about, say, intellectual property rights or legal liability in relation to AI-generated content), where attorneys are required to explain and contextualize the watermark, experts can be called to contest their interpretation, and disinterested judges are responsible for overseeing the process of determining their meaning. 10 In many other contexts, however, includ-ing those—like plagiarism detection—where enthusiasm for these tools is most pronounced, there is less institutional in-frastructure to guide their implementation. Rather than confine their use to the handful of institutional settings equipped to interpret them correctly, however, we could put digital watermarks to other uses. We could use them to answer a different question than the forensic ap-proach asks, one that’s a better fit for the kind of statistical evidence they offer. Instead of asking “is this piece of con-tent real or synthetic?” we could ask “how is synthetic con-tent impacting this media ecosystem, on the whole?” Using watermarks to assess the provenance of individual pieces of content requires a nuanced understanding of false-positive rates, hypothesis testing, and uncertainty quantification. Us-ing watermarks to study content flowing through informa-

> strong as the one detected in an individual piece of content known to not be synthetic.
> 10 Science and Technology Studies scholars have developed a ro-bust critique of the authority of forensic evidence in courts (Cole 2001; Roberts 2011) and the commodification and advocacy role of expert witnesses in interpreting scientific evidence (Goodwin 1994; Jasanoff 1995). So while we use here the court as illustrative of a site where institutional scaffolding for evidence interpretation is provided, it too can serve as a site where evidence is over indexed and misinterpreted.

tional ecosystems in the aggregate avoids much of this nu-ance. To answer questions about the aggregate—taking what we call an “ecosystems approach”—statistical evidence is exactly what you need. Having recast the questions digital watermarks aim to answer, different governance interventions come into view. Forensic questions, such as whether a given piece of con-tent is synthetic, which model generated it, and who is re-sponsible for its creation, are conducive to individualized interventions (holding specific parties accountable for harm-ful content, for example, or asserting intellectual property rights). By contrast, ecosystem questions lend themselves to systems-level interventions, addressing broader patterns and structures of information environments (such as bring-ing down aggregate levels of synthetic content). Consider, again, the case of plagiarism detection. Forensic questions— e.g., “Was this paper generated by AI?”—suggest a particu-lar kind of response: if it was, then charge the student who submitted it with an academic integrity violation. Ecosys-tems questions—e.g., “How much student work at our uni-versity is AI-generated?”—point in a different direction. If the problem is overall levels of plagiarism and the goal is to reduce them, then one might intervene by rethinking how to evaluate student performance or by reconfiguring the incen-tives students face. 

## Watermarks as Friction 

Shifting from a forensic perspective to an ecosystem per-spective can also help address concerns about the robustness of digital watermarks. Skeptics warn that watermarks are brittle—too easily undone by anyone determined enough to circumvent them (Sadasivan et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024). But if the goal is not simply to identify and address each individual piece of synthetic content, and instead, to under-stand and intervene at the ecosystems level, then worries about robustness lose force. Although any individual water-mark might be vulnerable to tampering, removal, or avoid-ance, it would be complicated, even for skilled attackers, to disable watermarks at scale. Indeed, viewed from this vantage point, questions about robustness start to resemble more familiar issues around in-formation and internet governance. In debates about how to manage online mis- and disinformation, for example, schol-ars have argued that, for both practical and legal reasons, the goal of perfect enforcement—eliminating all misleading content—is out of reach. Instead, they suggest, policy in-terventions should aim to lower overall levels of mis- and disinformation, either by increasing the costs of producing and disseminating it, or by slowing the process of ingesting it (and thereby reducing the odds it’s believed). Both goals can be advanced, they argue, by introducing friction into on-line information environments (Goodman 2021). Traditionally, human-computer interaction research aimed to minimize friction. The best user interfaces were “seamless”—they allowed users to work without interrup-tion, to become absorbed in their activity as the computer became, in design theorist Don Norman’s language, “invis-ible” (Norman 1998). Friction, according to this view, was the enemy. But as the risks of engaging uncritically with computers (especially online) became more evident, the idea of encouraging people to pause, giving users time to think and reflect, gained purchase. HCI scholars have begun to advocate for friction as a mechanism to create “mindful interactions”—“interactions that are reflective, informed and safe” (Cox et al. 2016)—and legal scholars have begun to theorize various forms of “desirable inefficiency” as a means of “inject[ing] complex human values into systems” (Ohm and Frankle 2018; Frischmann and Benesch 2023). Critics of watermarks are right to insist that they lack robustness—that they can’t guarantee perfect enforcement. But watermarks need not be perfectly robust to create fric-tion in content production, circulation, and consumption (Fernandez, Level, and Furon 2024). On the supply side, wa-termarks can raise the costs of generating and distributing synthetic content, perhaps enough to disincentivize at least some socially undesirable uses, and they can help slow the spread of harmful content. On the demand side, watermarks could provide evidence of the overall prevalence of syn-thetic content, providing consumers of content with a gen-eral barometer of how to approach content on the platform with more careful consideration, caution, or skepticism. In the case of social media, for example, rather than expect watermarks to provide a perfect infrastructure for labeling synthetic content (a challenge in both accuracy and interpre-tation, as we discuss further in the next section), providing users with a public-facing measure of the overall prevalence of synthetic content on the platform might be a mechanism for overriding the seamlessness of the interface. The desire for perfect enforcement is often also accompa-nied by calls for automated enforcement—the scale of on-line content requiring some clear means of triggering con-tent removal or posting without much human judgement in each individual case. The forensic hope for watermarks in such a regulation-by-machine scenario amounts to an ex ante measure—removing watermarked content before it gets posted or labeling it at the moment of posting. Early expe-riences of automated enforcement online, especially the use of digital rights management (DRM) tools to enforce intel-lectual property rights, are a cautionary tale for ex ante ap-proaches, leading many legal scholars and critics to prefer ex post strategies for regulating digital media, which allow for flexibility and interpretive openness of legal doctrines such as Fair Use (Zittrain 2008; Radin 2004). As Tarleton Gille-spie put it, “instead of using law’s ex post assessment of intent and consequence, technology prepares for the worst and lives by it” (Gillespie 2007). The ecosystem approach we advocate is more compatible with ex post assessments of the meaning and significance of watermarks, compared with the forensic hope for perfect, ex ante enforcement. As discussed in the “Watermarks as Evidence” section, above, appropriate institutional scaffolding is a precondition for in-terpreting the meaning and strength of claims made based on the statistical result a watermark detector yields. But the kinds of ex post strategies most likely to succeed are not geared toward flagging individual pieces of content as syn-thetic; rather they aim to offer insight into the overall levels of synthetic content in a given information ecosystem. 

## Who are Watermarks For? 

The first requirement for watermarking synthetic content at scale is for model providers to embed watermarks in their products’ outputs. But it is not immediately obvious who ought to be the audience for that signal and through what detection mechanism. For example, Google’s SynthID sys-tem does not share widely the technical specs of the Syn-thID watermark, but it does offer a publicly available de-tector anyone can use to pick up the watermark’s signal. On the other hand, Meta, as a content platform, uses both its own and other providers’ watermark and metadata stan-dards to label some synthetic content as AI-generated across its platform, but does not offer a public-facing detector like SynthID. More recently, OpenAI announced the launch of its own public detection tool which relies on C2PA, Syn-thID, and other undisclosed watermarking technology (Ope-nAI 2026). There are good reasons to keep a watermark system and its detector closed. Knowledge of the specific technical mechanism is one way in which a user wishing to remove the watermark can circumvent detection. But even a black-boxed detector like Google’s can allow an adversary to query it enough times to derive some insight into possible effec-tive circumvention. This dynamic is what Leibowicz et al. refer to as the “detection dilemma”: the more widely avail-able detection tools become the less effective they are, as more is learned about how to circumvent them (Leibowicz, McGregor, and Ovadya 2021). But the dilemma is primar-ily acute in the forensic mode. 11 As discussed in the “Water-marks as Friction” section, the labor-intensive process of de-riving possible strategies for circumvention from the avail-ability of a detector is less of a problem when we want to measure both weak signals and overall prevalence at scale. The problem of access then is not about the detection tool it-self, but about access to a sufficiently representative sample of content in the overall ecosystem. Examining proprietary technological systems from the outside has long been a challenge in designing procedures for auditing and evaluating both AI tools and digital me-dia platforms. The individual experience of the researcher-as-user is an unstable representation of the system as a whole given the role played by customization, algorithmic curation, and the indeterminate nature of a model’s output (Seaver 2019; Burrell 2015). Even with aggregate evalua-tions among larger test groups, the experiences of certain underrepresented groups within the test group may go unno-ticed (Barocas et al. 2021). An ecosystems approach might therefore be most useful in contexts where the content host or “owner” of the ecosystem is motivated to measure the per-vasiveness of synthetic content. One clear example where these interests align is the academic plagiarism case dis-cussed above, where a university is interested in a bird’s-eye 

> 11 The authors lay out seven distinct detection contexts across different scales of media and differently resourced detecting actors. But in all these contexts, the question still remains one of specific media authenticity as part of a forensic question, and not one of saturation of the overall ecosystem or even a given platform (Lei-bowicz, McGregor, and Ovadya 2021).

view of work submitted by students. As we explore in one of the scenarios below, streaming platforms or social media platforms may also have reasons for wanting such insight and producing an internal detection process. And though in-ternal audits are fraught tools for creating external, public accountability, as Raji et al. argue, they can help by produc-ing shareable artifacts like transparency reports (Raji et al. 2020). Turning away from the forensic perspective also reframes the question of effectively communicating the meaning of watermarks to audiences directly consuming watermarked content. When social media platforms sought to apply syn-thetic content labels to user-shared content, they quickly discovered that user expectations differed from the taxon-omy of labels. For example, Meta reversed course on its initial labeling policy after users complained that authentic images that were then retouched or edited using AI tools were being labeled as synthetic content as though they were wholly generated by an AI tool (Bickert 2024). Ecosystem approaches raise different questions about how users of a platform might interpret the platform-level disclosure of the rates of synthetic content. It may cultivate a more skeptical or more trusting orientation towards any given piece of me-dia they encounter if the rate is either higher or lower than their expectations. Disclosing that synthetic content is being monitored may also lead to greater trust in the platform’s proactive governance measures or suspicion toward its mon-itoring of user behavior. It may also be taken up as a com-petitive advantage that draws users to certain platforms that provide such an analysis. In none of these cases do water-marks “solve” the problem of trust in the platform. But un-like the forensic approach, the ecosystems approach draws user attention to their overall media environment, rather than providing an ambiguous and potentially misapplied label to specific pieces of content. 

## Risks of Watermarks 

Using watermarks as a tool for governing AI is not with-out risks. Thus far, we have focused on the risks that stem from using watermarks in the standard forensic mode— especially, as we discussed in the “Watermarks as Evidence” section, the risk of misinterpreting the statistical evidence watermarks provide, which is likely in contexts where ap-propriate interpretive infrastructure is lacking. But using wa-termarks in the ecosystem mode that we argue for carries risks too, both at the individual level and at the population level. At the individual level there are risks to privacy, partic-ularly for high-bandwidth information channels like video content. For high-bandwidth channels, not only can a wa-termark be detected in individual units of synthetic content, watermarks could be personalized to an individual user of a genAI system (Cohen, Hoover, and Schoenbach 2024). A personalized watermark identifies not just the originating model for a unit of synthetic content, but also the specific account with the model provider used to generate the con-tent. Obviously, any tool that can be used to identify con-tent generated by a particular person or group can be used to surveil them. Using personalized watermarks in this way would fit a recurring pattern—exemplified, most notably, by the “surveillance advertising” model—of turning otherwise innocuous digital traces into tracking devices. Indeed, it’s possible that their value for surveillance could ultimately be the economic incentive that drives widespread adoption and deployment of genAI watermarks. Importantly, though, personalized watermarks are much less realistic for low-bandwidth channels like text, where there is simply not enough entropy in the generative process to imbue content with a strong personalized watermark, compared with wa-termarks for images or video. At the population level, digital watermarks risk creating complacency. Because they are easy to implement and (by design) have minimal impact on the quality of a genAI sys-tem, watermarks could be seen as a quick fix—a means for policymakers to demonstrate responsiveness as synthetic content floods our information ecosystems, in a manner that comes with very little cost. While watermarks can improve our ability to monitor flows of synthetic content through these ecosystems, they do not address more difficult pol-icy questions about how to actually regulate those flows. Furthermore, watermarks require the compliance of genAI providers to deliver watermarked content. Even in a world where major model providers agree to watermark their offer-ings, there will be blind spots. This includes unwatermarked synthetic content from bespoke model providers, as well as synthetic content that has been scrubbed of watermarks by adversarial actors (Zhang et al. 2024). Though adversar-ial scrubbing is more likely in scenarios where watermarks are deployed for forensics or moderation (banning content that meets some threshold of watermark detection) than in contexts where they are used for monitoring and ecosystem analysis. At both the individual and population levels, there is the additional risk that watermarks could be forged. Most cur-rent AI watermarking protocols depend upon a watermark key that is used by both the generator, to synthesize water-marked content, and the detector, to identify the watermark in synthesized content. Any actor in possession of the detec-tor has access to this key and can therefore synthesize new watermarked content with the same watermark as the orig-inal model provider. We can imagine any number of incen-tives to forge a watermark—one salient analog is the forgery of User-Agent strings by web browsers. Methods that isolate the detection capability from watermark generation are an active area of research (Liu et al. 2024; Fairoze et al. 2025a) but their practicality is uncertain and theoretical results sug-gest that they are unlikely to be very robust (Fairoze et al. 2025b). Lastly, watermarks may be developed using skewed human-generated content that could lead to a bias in false positives (human-generated content being flagged as syn-thetic content). In text-based watermarking in particular, there is a concern that the charge of “sounding like AI” might be directed at particular groups such as English lan-guage learners or minoritized groups. Prior work on bias in AI systems such as automated speech recognition (Koe-necke et al. 2020) highlights this potential for disparate out-comes in analyzing human speech and text generation. If wa-termarks are used in the ecosystem mode, studies about the potential systemic bias in false positives will be a necessary step in assessing the system’s fairness. 

## Incentives For and Against Watermarks 

Finally, whether digital watermarks are a viable governance tool will be determined, in part, by how relevant stakehold-ers understand incentives for and against adopting them. To conclude this part of the paper, we thus turn to how incentive structures for watermarking change when water-marks are used for ecosystem monitoring rather than foren-sic identification. By exploring some common, if stylized, arrangements we can discern patterns of incentives where the ecosystem mode may lead to a stronger alignment of interests for watermarking synthetic content. The forensic mode often assumes an adversarial relationship between the content producer and content host or viewer. We argue that using watermarks in the ecosystem mode, rather than the forensic mode, could reduce the incentives of some parties to resist their adoption and “bring down the temperature” in situations where incentives for and against watermarks re-main misaligned, thereby increasing the odds they’re imple-mented. First, consider “enterprise” or “business-to-business” (B2B) settings. These are cases where AI firms sell AI ser-vices to other companies. For example, companies buy ac-cess to chatbots to automate customer service work and they buy access to AI coding tools to automate or partially au-tomate in-house software development. Such B2B arrange-ments are increasingly the dominant place where frontier AI companies are looking to monetize their products and re-coup the astronomical investments being made in model de-velopment (Isaac 2026). If watermarks are understood as forensic tools, the incen-tives landscape in these cases is likely to be mixed. Compa-nies buying AI services are likely to welcome watermarks, since they have an interest in gauging how much the services they’re paying for are utilized and how much value they’re generating for the company. AI providers might have com-peting motivations—eager to attract and satisfy customers, but hesitant to divulge evidence, where it exists, that their services are under-performing—but they are likely, in the end, to give their customers what they want. 12 By contrast, the company employees who are expected to use AI might resist, worrying that watermarks could be used as instru-ments of worker surveillance (as discussed in the previous section). But notice how the incentives change if watermarks are deployed for ecosystem monitoring rather than foren-sic identification: if individual employees aren’t at risk of surveillance through watermarks they will have less reason to oppose them. Next, consider cases where the AI provider and the plat-form for generated content are one and the same: for exam-

> 12 Indeed, it’s easy to imagine AI providers using watermarks as a means of differentiating their services from competitors. In the context of targeted advertising, for example, companies like Google and Meta have worked tirelessly to develop tracking tech-nologies that provide their customers—advertisers—with evidence that their advertisements work. See (McGuigan 2023).

ple, social media companies like Meta and TikTok have de-ployed their own generative AI systems for use by their own users in their own apps (Meta 2024; TikTok for Business 2024). In such cases, both the platforms and a large segment of their users—those who primarily consume content—are likely to embrace watermarks. The platforms will want inter-nal data about how their technology is being used, and con-tent consumers will want to know when they’re viewing syn-thetic media. If watermarks are deployed as forensic tools, however, another segment of users—content producers— may attempt to disable or evade them in order to pass off synthetic content as their own. Notice again, though, how incentives change when watermarks are used for ecosystem monitoring: if platforms only aim to detect aggregate lev-els of synthetic content, and content creators don’t face the threat of identification and sanction, no individual creator will be motivated to undertake the considerable effort re-quired to circumvent detection. Lastly, consider cases where AI models are used by con-sumers to generate content distributed elsewhere: LLMs are used to write posts for social media; music generation tools are used to create songs distributed on streaming platforms; students use AI to complete homework assignments; or re-searchers use AI to write scientific papers. In these kinds of cases, incentives are likely to remain misaligned regardless of how watermarks are conceptualized and utilized, since content consumers will be interested in knowing what to make of what they’re seeing and hearing, while AI providers will have little motivation to generate evidence—either at the individual level or in the aggregate—that their tools are implicated. Even in these cases, deploying watermarks for ecosys-tem monitoring rather than forensic identification could help defuse tension and motivate powerful actors, such as rightsh-olders or regulators, to insist on their adoption. For example, Spotify—likely in response to pressure from the recording industry—announced new efforts to help “[preserve] trust across the entire music ecosystem” by better managing the flow of AI-generated songs. 13 More broadly, lawmakers of-ten look to mandated disclosure as a low-cost and light-touch means of regulation (Susser 2019). While powerful AI companies are sure to resist policies compelling them to label individual pieces of content as having been generated by their own systems, they may be less inclined to spend po-litical capital fighting against forced disclosure of aggregate, ecosystem-level statistics. 

# Scenarios 

To understand the implications of ecosystem analysis us-ing watermarks, we consider the examples of (1) a music streaming service and (2) scientific research. While these scenarios are speculative, they provide more granularity and context for assessing implications of the ecosystem perspec-tive. In the case of music streaming, content consists of high-bandwidth audio, so forensic analysis of fully synthetic, wa-termarked content may sometimes be possible; but as we 

> 13 https://newsroom.spotify.com/2025-09-25/spotify-strengthens-ai-protections/

discussed in Section 3.1, the mere existence of statistical ev-idence does not tell us how and when to act. An ecosys-tem analysis answers a distinct category of questions about the prevalence and distribution of synthetic content on the service. In the case of scientific research, content is low-bandwidth text (i.e., papers) making any forensic analysis more ambiguous. Here an ecosystem analysis can provide critical insight into prevailing patterns of synthetic content. 

## Music Streaming Service 

A music streaming service has three sets of stakeholders: the users of the service, artists who distribute their music via the service, and the service provider itself. The interests of these stakeholders may be misaligned with respect to syn-thetic content, raising the questions of competing interests discussed in Section 3.3. Early responses from users express a strong preference for authenticity in the initial wave of synthetic content (Getty Images VisualGPS 2024; Parshakov et al. 2025; Kirk and Givi 2025). Artists see synthetic con-tent as competition that devalues their work (Goetze 2024); synthetic content has expressly been used to dilute human artist revenue in scams that take advantage of the monetiza-tion strategy of streaming services (U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York 2024). The service provider itself may benefit from synthetic content if it re-duces licensing costs in the short term, though the ubiquity of synthetic content on its platform may undermine its rep-utation and impact its subscription model in the long term. This echoes the tensions in incentive structures discussed in Section 3.5. We expect that both forensic and ecosystem analyses will be of interest to the stakeholders of music streaming services. Audio is a medium-bandwidth information chan-nel—higher bandwidth than text, but lower bandwidth than video. Forensic identification of watermarked, fully synthe-sized audio recordings might sometimes be possible; foren-sic analysis of audio produced or edited with AI assistance will produce more ambiguous results. Editing operations are low entropy operations compared to full audio synthe-sis, and a watermark imparted on edited audio will be rel-atively weak. Weak watermarks are poor evidence for judi-cial decisions like content removal or demonetization, but these signals will still be statistically evident in the aggre-gate. If a platform were to publicly report on synthetic con-tent within music categories or monetization pools, this dis-closure could influence the behavior of users, advertisers, and distributors even without more heavy-handed forensic enforcement; this is the friction function of watermarks de-scribed in Section 3.2. An ecosystem analysis would provide broad insight into the volume of synthetic content on a music streaming ser-vice. But producing such insight requires the cooperation of the platform to review content across its services, which may not align with the platform’s incentives. This illustrates the access questions raised in Section 3.3; ecosystem analysis requires not just a detector, but also a representative sample of content from the platform. Still, the platform itself may have reasons to want such an analysis, revealing the rela-tive volume of synthetic content across different music gen-res, as well as the relative consumption of synthetic content among different sub-populations of users. This transforms watermarks from a forensic tool for platform moderation into an analytical tool for platform governance, informing policy decisions about recommendation algorithms, playlist curation, and monetization strategies, as well as disclosures to other stakeholders discussed in Section 3.4. 

## Scientific Writing 

The growth of synthetic content in scientific writing poses challenges to the integrity of peer review and moderation processes. For example, arXiv, a pre-print platform for sci-entific papers, no longer accepts preprints of computer sci-ence surveys and position papers due to an overwhelming rise in AI-written submissions (Boboris 2025). Using the ecosystem mode of analysis described in Section 3.1, arXiv determined that the moderation burden posed by an on-slaught of low quality survey articles outweighs the value of hosting pre-review content in these categories. This de-termination was made based on heuristic assessment of the growth of synthetic content in these categories; watermarks could provide more nuanced and quantitative support for such decision-making. Ethically, reasons can be marshalled for and against ban-ning or marking the use of AI in scientific writing (Aber-nethy 2025). Pre-generative AI tools like spellcheck and grammar suggestions have been a productive and valuable component of scientific writing for decades. There is no bright line between the use of generative AI as a writing as-sistant and its use to synthesize more substantive arguments and ideas, 14 though some venues have taken a strong posi-tion against the use of LLMs in academic writing. 15 Prag-matically, as arXiv’s experience proves, an unchecked per-missive stance toward frictionless production of synthetic papers threatens to overwhelm the peer review and mod-eration functions of scientific institutions (Kusumegi et al. 2025). While there are nascent efforts to assist peer review and moderation itself with AI, 16 ultimately the integrity of the scientific process and trust in scientific institutions rests on human oversight. 17 Reintroducing some friction into the authoring system in the form of watermarks, as discussed in Section 3.2, can support the integrity of these processes. ArXiv has recently begun using hallucinated references as a natural watermark on AI-generated documents (Chawla 2026). While useful as a stop-gap, this is an ephemeral wa-termark that will disappear as AI systems continue to im-prove. More importantly, arXiv has taken an entirely foren-

> 14 See (Csiszar 2024) for a historical perspective on search aids and authorship in scientific writing.
> 15 See, for example, the editorial policy for the journal Ethics: https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/journals/et/ai-policy
> 16 See https://agents4science.stanford.edu/ for a maximalist per-spective on the use of AI for both scientific writing and peer review.
> 17 Historians of science, however, suggest that the practice of peer review itself is a rather recent development designed more toward assuaging broader public critiques of the integrity of the institutions of science than for providing scrutiny of any specific article, echoing our proposal for the usefulness of the ecosystems approach (Csiszar 2016).

sic view of this natural watermark, using hallucinated cita-tions as forensic evidence to support banning authors from the arXiv platform. The ensuing controversy illustrates the tensions in the forensic mode discussed in Section 3.5. An ecosystem analysis of AI use in scientific writing, fa-cilitated by watermarks, could assist with institutional over-sight while avoiding the fraught binary decisions associated with a forensic analysis of whether a particular scientific document has been overly authored by AI. This is the change in perspective described in Section 3.1, from asking whether a paper is AI-generated to asking how AI use is changing the publication ecosystem. Ecosystem analyses could help guide policy surrounding the use of AI, for example, pro-viding guidelines for authors and reviewers regarding the use and misuse of AI and assessing compliance with these guidelines. These analyses could also provide transparency surrounding the use of AI in scientific writing, assuring the integrity of the scientific process both for the broader public and for the scientific community itself. 

# Conclusion 

This paper has advocated for ecosystem analyses of the distribution of synthetic content on digital platforms us-ing watermarks. Skepticism towards the efficacy of water-marks has primarily been animated by the forensic imag-ination of synthetic content identification. While we agree that watermarks have significant limitations as a forensic tool for determining the individual case of synthetic con-tent, we argue that they are well-suited for measuring and monitoring the flows of synthetic content in an information ecosystem, such as a media streaming platform, a dating site, or an academic institution. Taking the ecosystems per-spective on watermarks can provide us with aggregate in-sight about synthetic content saturation, with lower techni-cal demands on the strength and precision of the watermark-ing methodology. This perspective can yield insights even for low-bandwidth information channels such as short-form text, where AI watermarks are inherently weak. Reframing watermarks from a forensic tool to an ecosys-tem indicator points to new uses and efficacy but it also changes the nature of the governance questions posed by wa-termarking technology. Rather than content moderation and enforcement, this ecosystem perspective asks us to measure and act upon aggregate watermark signals at scale. Policy-makers and platforms should consider how synthetic content saturation statistics gleaned from watermarks might be dis-closed to users, regulators, and researchers. Such evidence is also more likely to inform institutional changes to policies and incentives, rather than individualized punitive measures. This approach also places responsibilities upon AI model providers; for watermarks to function as an ecosystem met-ric, they must be imprinted upon a critical mass of synthetic content. From this perspective, while concerted top-down regulatory efforts seem to have halted, the current central-ization of the AI model provider market suggests coordina-tion and buy-in might still be feasible; convincing just a few major providers to implement AI watermarking would re-sult in watermarks on a significant fraction of all synthetic content. At the ecosystem level, these signals would be far more salient than trace amounts of unmarked synthetic con-tent produced by self-hosted models. As adoption of genAI tools continues to grow, synthetic content will become increasingly pervasive and the line be-tween fully human generated content and synthetic content will blur. Marking and labeling synthetic content with suf-ficient gradation and nuance at scale is increasingly chal-lenging. Furthermore, attitudes towards the legitimacy and desirability of synthetic content may also change over time. In this emerging media environment, our goals may shift from identifying and policing synthetic content, towards a broader understanding of how genAI technologies shape our platforms and our discourse. Watermarks offer us a tool for navigating and adapting to a new epistemic reality in which synthetic content is not deemed inherently untrustworthy or antithetical to content produced by humans. But, while we have argued that watermarks have a role to play in this emerging media landscape, the ecosystem perspective also makes it clear that they are no silver bullet to the thorny challenges of our information environment. The key to ef-fectively using watermarks is to ask the right set of ques-tions. 

# References 

Abernethy, N. J. 2025. Let stochastic parrots squawk: Why academic journals should allow large language models to coauthor articles. AI and Ethics , 5(5): 4535–4553. Barocas, S.; Guo, A.; Kamar, E.; Krones, J.; Morris, M. R.; Vaughan, J. W.; Wadsworth, W. D.; and Wallach, H. 2021. Designing Disaggregated Evaluations of AI Systems: Choices, Considerations, and Tradeoffs. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society ,AIES ’21, 368–378. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450384735. Begum, M.; and Uddin, M. S. 2020. Digital image water-marking techniques: a review. Information , 11(2): 110. Bickert, M. 2024. Our Approach to Labeling AI-Generated Content and Manipulated Media. Meta Newsroom. Updated July 1, 2024 and September 12, 2024. Blanchette, J.-F. 2012. Burdens of proof : cryptographic cul-ture and evidence law in the age of electronic documents .Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. ISBN 9780262017510. Boboris, K. 2025. Attention Authors: Updated Practice for Review Articles and Position Papers in arXiv CS Category. arXiv blog. Accessed May 21, 2026. Burrell, J. 2015. How the Machine ‘Thinks:’ Understanding Opacity in Machine Learning Algorithms. SSRN Electronic Journal . Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract= 2660674; DOI: 10.1177/2053951715622512. California Legislature. 2024. Senate Bill No. 942 (California AI Transparency Act). Chaptered as Chapter 291, Statutes of 2024. Effective January 1, 2026. Chawla, D. S. 2026. Researchers who use hallucinated ref-erences to face arXiv ban. Nature .Chesney, B.; and Citron, D. 2019. Deep Fakes: A Looming Challenge for Privacy, Democracy, and National Security. California Law Review , 107(6): 1753–1820. Place: Berkeley Publisher: California Law Review, Inc. Christ, M.; Gunn, S.; and Zamir, O. 2024. Undetectable wa-termarks for language models. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory , 1125–1139. PMLR. Cohen, A.; Hoover, A.; and Schoenbach, G. 2024. Water-marking language models for many adaptive users. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11109 .Cole, S. A. 2001. Suspect identities : a history of fingerprint-ing and criminal identification . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674004558. Cox, A. L.; Gould, S. J. J.; Cecchinato, M. E.; Iacovides, I.; and Renfree, I. 2016. Design Frictions for Mindful Interac-tions: The Case for Microboundaries. In CHI’16 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’16) , 1389–1397. New York, NY, USA: ACM. Published May 7–12, 2016, San Jose, CA. Cox, I. J.; and Miller, M. L. 2002. The First 50 Years of Electronic Watermarking. EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing , 2002(2): 820936. Csiszar, A. 2016. Peer review: Troubled from the start. Na-ture , 532(7599): 306–308. Csiszar, A. 2024. Blurry Authorship: Originality in Science Before and After Large Language Models. Historical Stud-ies in the Natural Sciences , 54: 611–616. DeepMind. 2025. SynthID: A tool to watermark and identify AI-generated content. Web page. European Union. 2026. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 (Artificial Intelligence Act). Legislative Body: OP DATPRO. Executive Office of the President. 2023. Executive Order 14110: Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence. Federal Register, 88 FR 75191. Signed October 30, 2023. Executive Office of the President. 2025. Executive Order 14179: Removing Barriers to American Leadership in Ar-tificial Intelligence. Federal Register, 90 FR 8741. Signed January 23, 2025. Fairoze, J.; Garg, S.; Jha, S.; Mahloujifar, S.; Mahmoody, M.; and Wang, M. 2025a. Publicly-Detectable Watermark-ing for Language Models. IACR Communications in Cryp-tology , 1(4). Fairoze, J.; Ortiz-Jimenez, G.; Vecerik, M.; Jha, S.; and Gowal, S. 2025b. On the Difficulty of Constructing a Ro-bust and Publicly-Detectable Watermark. In The 28th Inter-national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics .Fernandez, P.; Level, A.; and Furon, T. 2024. What Lies Ahead for Generative AI Watermarking. Workshop on Gen-erative AI and Law, at International Conference on Machine Learning .Frischmann, B. M.; and Benesch, S. 2023. Friction-In-Design Regulation as 21st Century Time, Place, and Manner Restriction. Yale Journal of Law & Technology , 25(2): 376–445. Available via SSRN. Getty Images VisualGPS. 2024. Building Trust in the Age of AI. VisualGPS Report, Getty Images. Last updated May 23, 2025; based on consumer survey of 30,000 adults across 25 countries. Gillespie, T. 2007. Wired shut : copyright and the shape of digital culture . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 9780262072823. Goetze, T. S. 2024. AI Art is Theft: Labour, Extraction, and Exploitation: Or, On the Dangers of Stochastic Pollocks. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 186–196. Goodman, E. P. 2021. Digital Fidelity and Friction. Nevada Law Journal , 21(2): 623–650. Goodwin, C. 1994. Professional Vision. American anthro-pologist , 96(3): 606–633. Habgood-Coote, J. 2023. Deepfakes and the Epistemic Apocalypse. Synthese , 201(3): 1–23. Hans, A.; Schwarzschild, A.; Cherepanova, V.; Kazemi, H.; Saha, A.; Goldblum, M.; Geiping, J.; and Goldstein, T. 2024. Spotting LLMs With Binoculars: Zero-Shot Detection of Machine-Generated Text. In International Conference on Machine Learning .Immerwahr, D. 2023. What the Doomsayers Get Wrong About Deepfakes. The New Yorker . Review of *A History of Fake Things on the Internet*. Isaac, M. 2026. Sam Altman’s Next High-Wire Act: Get-ting OpenAI to Make More Money. The New York Times .Accessed May 21, 2026. Jasanoff, S. 1995. Science at the bar : law, science, and tech-nology in America . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674793021. Kamaruddin, N. S.; Kamsin, A.; Por, L. Y.; and Rahman, H. 2018. A review of text watermarking: theory, methods, and applications. IEEE Access , 6: 8011–8028. Kirchenbauer, J.; Geiping, J.; Wen, Y.; Katz, J.; Miers, I.; and Goldstein, T. 2023. A watermark for large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,17061–17084. PMLR. Kirk, C. P.; and Givi, J. 2025. The AI-authorship effect: Understanding authenticity, moral disgust, and consumer re-sponses to AI-generated marketing communications. Jour-nal of Business Research , 186. Published online; Accessed: 2025-05-23. Kirschenbaum, M. G. 2008. Mechanisms : new media and the forensic imagination . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. ISBN 1-282-10063-7. Koenecke, A.; Nam, A.; Lake, E.; Nudell, J.; Quartey, M.; Mengesha, Z.; Toups, C.; Rickford, J. R.; Jurafsky, D.; and Goel, S. 2020. Racial disparities in automated speech recog-nition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,117(14): 7684–7689. Kuditipudi, R.; Thickstun, J.; Hashimoto, T.; and Liang, P. 2024. Robust Distortion-free Watermarks for Language Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Kusumegi, K.; Yang, X.; Ginsparg, P.; de Vaan, M.; Stuart, T.; and Yin, Y. 2025. Scientific production in the era of large language models. Science , 390(6779): 1240–1243. Leibowicz, C. 2023. Why Watermarking AI-Generated Con-tent Won’t Guarantee Trust Online. MIT Technology Re-view. Leibowicz, C. R.; McGregor, S.; and Ovadya, A. 2021. The Deepfake Detection Dilemma: A Multistakeholder Explo-ration of Adversarial Dynamics in Synthetic Media. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES ’21) , 736–744. Also available as arXiv:2102.06109. Liu, A.; Pan, L.; Hu, X.; Li, S.; Wen, L.; King, I.; and Philip, S. Y. 2024. An Unforgeable Publicly Verifiable Watermark for Large Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Massachusetts Legislature. 2025. An Act regulating prove-nance regarding artificial intelligence (House Bill No. 90). Referred to Joint Committee on Advanced Information Technology, the Internet and Cybersecurity. Introduced by Representative Jay D. Livingstone of Boston. McGuigan, L. 2023. Selling the American people: Advertis-ing, optimization, and the origins of AdTech . MIT Press. Meta. 2024. Meet Your New Assistant: Meta AI, Built With Llama 3. Mitchell, E.; Lee, Y.; Khazatsky, A.; Manning, C. D.; and Finn, C. 2023. Detectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning .National Institute of Standards and Technology. 2024. Re-ducing Risks Posed by Synthetic Content: An Overview of Technical Approaches to Digital Content Transparency (NIST AI 100-4). Draft Technical Report AI 100-4, National Institute of Standards and Technology. Draft published April 29, 2024. Nemecek, A.; He, H.; Cheng, G.; and Ayday, E. 2026. Authenticated Contradictions from Desynchronized Prove-nance and Watermarking. arXiv:2603.02378. Norman, D. A. 1998. The Invisible Computer: Why Good Products Can Fail, the Personal Computer Is So Com-plex, and Information Appliances Are the Solution . Cam-bridge, MA: MIT Press, paperback (1999 reprint) edition. ISBN 9780262640411. Hardcover first edition: September 1, 1998; Reprint paperback: August 18, 1999. Ohm, P.; and Frankle, J. 2018. Desirable Inefficiency. 

Florida Law Review , 70(4): 777–838. OpenAI. 2026. Advancing content provenance for a safer, more transparent AI ecosystem. https://openai.com/index/ advancing-content-provenance/. Accessed May 21, 2026. Parshakov, P.; Naidenova, I.; Paklina, S.; Matkin, N.; and Nesseler, C. 2025. Users Favor LLM-Generated Content– Until They Know It’s AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16458 .Radin, M. J. 2004. Regulation by Contract, Regulation by Machine. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE) / Zeitschrift f¨ ur die gesamte Staatswis-senschaft , 160(1): 142–156. Raji, I. D.; Smart, A.; White, R. N.; Mitchell, M.; Gebru, T.; Hutchinson, B.; Smith-Loud, J.; Theron, D.; and Barnes, P. 2020. Closing the AI accountability gap: defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In 

Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Account-ability, and Transparency , FAT* ’20, 33–44. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450369367. Read, M. 2018. How Much of the Internet Is Fake? Turns Out, a Lot of It, Actually. Intelligencer (New York Maga-zine) .Roberts, D. 2011. Fatal invention : how science, politics, and big business re-create race in the twenty-first century .New York: New Press. ISBN 9786613786357. Sadasivan, V. S.; Kumar, A.; Balasubramanian, S.; Wang, W.; and Feizi, S. 2024. Can AI-Generated Text be Reliably Detected? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11156 . Version 4, pub-lished January 17, 2025. Sander, T.; Chang, H.; Souˇ cek, T.; Tran, T.; Lacatusu, V.; Re-buffi, S.-A.; Mourachko, A.; Parimi, S.; Ropers, C.; Moritz, R.; et al. 2026. TextSeal: A Localized LLM Watermark for Provenance & Distillation Protection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12456 .Scheirer, W. 2024. A history of fake things on the internet .Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, first edition. edition. ISBN 9781503637047. Seaver, N. 2019. Knowing Algorithms. In digitalSTS , 412– 422. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691187075. Susser, D. 2019. Notice after notice-and-consent: why pri-vacy disclosures are valuable even if consent frameworks aren’t. Journal of Information Policy , 9: 148–173. Tian, E.; and Cui, A. 2025. GPTZero: Towards detection of AI-generated text using zero-shot and supervised methods. TikTok for Business. 2024. Meet TikTok Symphony, Our New Creative AI Suite. U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York. 2024. U.S. v. Smith Indictment (Press Release PDF). Justice.gov. Indictment PDF. Zhang, H.; Edelman, B. L.; Francati, D.; Venturi, D.; Ate-niese, G.; and Barak, B. 2024. Watermarks in the sand: Im-possibility of strong watermarking for generative models. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning .Zittrain, J. 2008. The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It . Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300124873.